6.1 DEVELOPMENT'S RISKS

6.1.1 Manufactured risk
On the night of 2 December 1984, an explosion in a pesticide factory in Bhopal in Madhy Pradesh, India, spreada cloud of pollution over the city.The plant, owned by Union Carbide I dia Lumted, was built on the outsktrts of Bhopal city,
1 kilometre from the railway station and 3 kilometres from two hospitals. Over the next hour, about
3o metric tons of methyl isocyanate gas escaped and sank over the surrounding streets. Withm two days,
five thousand people had died from inhaling the gas, and half th_e population of the city ad fledm
terror The eventual total death toll has been estimated to be as high as 20,000 people, with hundreds of_ thous nds of people suffering chronic poisoning.
The accident in Bhopal happened when a tank was being cleaned. Water came into contact with liquid methyl isocyanate and generated gas that vented to the atmosphere. Responsibility for the tragedy. remainsa moot point: the explosion might have been averted had the automatic _co trols standardm such Union Carbide plants in the USA been installed, had the Indian government_ not msisted that manual controls be fitted, or had employees of the Indian subsidiary of Union Carbide followed plans more closely. The human cost of the disaster would have been much less if the plant had no: been bmlt so close to the city. The Indian government made an out-of-court settlement with Urnon Carbidem 1989 for
$470 million, although legal actions continued, both to make the state pay out this compensation to
victims and to make the plant's new owners clean up pollution. By 2009, the compensation had grown to $1.9 billion. In return, all civil and criminal cases against the corr:pany were termmated.At the start oflegal proceedings, the government said there had been some
3 000 deaths and 30,000 cases of injury. By then it had become clear that huge numbers of people were s ffering from gas exposure, and over half a million people received small amounts of co pensation
.After the disaster, 350 tonnes of toxic waste was kept ina leaking shed at the site, polluting soil and groundwater and affecting the health of the people of Bhopal.
Fifteen months after the Bhopal disaster, the German sociologist Ulrich Beck published his book Risikogesellschaft. Beck set out the idea that_th re was_a break f within modernity,a transition from classical industrial society towards a new formo 'risk society'. In place of localised risks, to nature, employees or local people, new forms of techno-. scientific risk offereda global threat. As he put it, 'a new twilight of opporturnne_s and hazai:ds comes mto existence'. Beck's arguments picked up on lon_g-standing envtronmentalist concern that science and technology were producing toxic matenals and hfe-threaternn_g processes that were novel in their longevity, the scale of their impact, their invisibility and their complexity. He suggested that


'social, political, economic and individual risks increasingly tend to escape the institutions for monitoring and protection'. Global ecological crisis could, therefore, no longer be thought of in terms oflocal 'environmental problems' but needed instead to be understood as 'a profound institutional crisis of industrial society itself'.
Beck defined risk as 'the probabilities of physical harm due to given technological or other processes'. The risks of pesticide production at Bhopal were, to Beck, part of 'a bargain struck by the Indian state on behalf of its people', a deal that balanced risk of poisoning and death against the benefits of work and useful agricultural fertilisers, pesticides and herbicides. The plant itself, and its belching pipes and steaming tanks, were an expensive symbol of developmental success, their products signifying 'emancipation from material need'. By contrast, the 'death threat' they contained remained largely invisible.
The pesticides being produced by Union Carbide in Bhopal were carbamates, including carbaryl, aldicarb and a mix of carbaryl and the organochlorine pesticide lindane, sold under the trade name Sevidol. All were part of the package of technical inputs of the 'Green Revolution', intended to revolutionise agricultural productivity in India as elsewhere and push back hunger and poverty. There is irony in 'the competition between the visible threat from hunger and the invisible threat of death from toxic chemicals'.
This choice between these unlike abstractions of promise and risk is inherent to thinking about development and sustainability Economic growth is regarded as necessary to reduce human poverty, and industrialisation under capitalism is taken to be a prerequisite of economic growth. That is how the earth's currently industrialised core countries got where they are, and copying them is the one big idea of the dominant developmentalist paradigm.
Development is a two-edged sword, promising to hack away at the choking creepers of poverty but at the same time bringing with it unrecognised, unregulated and often deeply hazardous change. Furthermore, the risks development creates are not distributed uniformly but are concentrated in space and time. They are faced disproportionately by the poor. On top of the burdens of ill health and poverty, they bear the largest hazards of technology's products in their workplace and in the degraded and unhealthy environmental conditions where they live. Limited governance capacity conspires with the naked urge of capital to treat the environment and the bodies of the poor as externalities, exposed to the hard edge of techno-scientific risk.
As discussed in Chapter 5, the logic of capitalism drives industry to relocate in search of cheap labour and resources and the freedom to externalise the costs of production. At the centre of that process lies the corporation, an institution structured to generate profit for investors. As the cutting blade at the sharp edge of capitalism, corporations have long sought profit in the global periphery, ever since the days of the giant imperial trading houses such as the British East India Company, ruthlessly annexing and ruling foreign lands in pursuit of revenue. The general profitability of industrialisation in developing countries was a phenomenon of the late twentieth century. It was possible because of changes in infrastructure, economy and society in developing countries, increased global economic integration, a revolution in communications and the mobility of capital.
The global capitalist system thrives by externalising the costs of environmental degradation. Low costs, cheap labour and limited environmental regulations provide opportunities to maximise profit in industrial ventures in the developing world. By the end of the twentieth century, industrialised countries had begun to evade the risks they had conjured up with their industrial technology by moving diem elsewhere. One effect of the search for sustainable development in industrialised countries has been the export of unsustainability offshore. Even as sustainable development became part of the language of developed-country governments, their citizens were importing the products of new factories in new industrial zones on the global periphery. The gleaming products that feed the West's insatiable consumer demand show little or nothing of how they are made. Child labour,




sweatshops, industrial pollution and urban poverty are far away down long chains of trade that are only slowly being made visible.
But the Bhopal disaster not only reflects a state of technology and modernity but also the nature of capitalism. Bhopal was brought about by the decisions within a private corporation. It takes its place ina long history of industrial accidents. The hazards of dangerous, poorly understood and unregulated industrial processes have long offered a threat to the welfare of workers as, for example, in the notorious case of the employees of the US Radium Corporation in the 1920s, who contracted mouth cancer licking the brushes with which they put luminescent dots of radioactive paint on watch faces
.
As industrial processes are scaled up, so too is the magnitude of accidents. There have been extensive industrial disasters before in industrialised countries that played a role in the development of environmentalism; for example, the fire at the first nuclear reactor in the UK at Sellafield in the UK in October 1957; the explosion at Flixburgh in the UK in 1974; the release of dioxin at Seveso in Italy in 1976; and the discovery of a toxic waste dump from the 1950s at Love Canal in New York
State in 197 8. Many other disasters have followed, such as the meltdown of the nuclear reactor at Chernobyl in the Ukraine in 1986; the explosion on the Piper Alpha oil rig in the North Sea in 1988; the Exxon Valdez oil spill in Alaska in 1989; the fire at the Texas City oil refinery in the USA in 2005; the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig explosion in the Gulf of Mexico in 2010; or the fire at the Tasreen Fashions factory in Dhaka in Bangladesh in 2012. Each corporate industrial disaster has its short moment of media attention but is soon forgotten. The catalogue of risk and hazard is long and shocking.

6.1.2 The politics ofrisk
Ulrich Beck's concept of'risk society' drew attention to modernity's difficulties with finding rational solutions to the environmental hazards that they have brought into being. He is clearly right that the modern techno-economic system produces risks at the same time as it produces wealth.The risks of modernisation are 'a wholesale product of industrialization and are systematically intensified as it becomes global'. He is surely also right that the novel form and scale of industrial risks make it hard for conventional governance institutions to manage them. Techno-scientific risks are not readily calculable and are not limited by traditional boundaries oflocation or time span or social groups
.
What is more controversial is Beck's further suggestion that risks are no longer limited to particular social groups but are, potentially at least, universal. The threat of late modern risks is so enormous that they cut across class lines. So even those who profit from the techno-scientific risks that modernity brings will eventually be affected. Here Beck's ideas run against experience of the political ecology of risk. Risk is translated through socio-economic status, geographical location, cultural values and belief. Not everybody experiences the risks of modernisation in the same way, or to the same extent.
Hazards are not universal. They reinforce existing class divisions rather than transcend them. As Harvey put it
not only do the rich occupy privileged niches in the habitat while the poor tend to work and live in the more toxic or hazardous zones... but the very design of the transformed ecosystem is
redolent of its social relations.

The impact of risk therefore remains fundamentally affected by social stratification.The idea of techno scientific risk asa boomerang that comes back to afflict the societies that create it may be true, but some societies and some classes of people are much less vulnerable than others: as Mythen puts it, 'the

boomer ng effect may bruise some, but it will administer knock-out blows to others'. Beck's risk society thesis fails to make the case that risk effects can be separated from class.
There is therefore a distributional logic to risk, both between rich and poor in industrialised countries and internationally between developed and developing countries. There is an associated danger that th pursuit of development will lead to neglect of environmental justice. In economic terms, it is logical to locate hazardous pollution where costs are low, where the poor are willing to accept low levels of compensation. But this outcome is unjust.
Commurnty leaders are faced with the dilemma of'trading their people's environmental health in return for basic material security'. Debate in the USA drew attention to the differential exposure of minorities, native people and people of colour to environmental risks, particularly in the location of toxic waste dumps and other polluting facilities. The manifest unfairness of the outcome of corporate and municipal decisions about noxious facilities gave rise to the environmental justice movement and the concept of'environmental racism'.
Environ ental justice was an important element in wider concern about environmental health, a key element m the growth of environmentalism in the USA. The movement has been built around particular cases, many of them highly disturbing and high profile. One such was the protest about Love Canal in Buffalo, New York, in 1977, where, between 1942 and 1952, the Hooker Chemical and Plastics Corporation buried about 22,000 tons of toxic waste. Subsequently, a school and houses were built on the landfill. By the late 197Os, severe health problems were being experienced in the area, and children were being born with severe disabilities. Following protest, a Federal State of Emergency was declared, and residents were rehoused. The Environmental Protection Agency sued Occidental Petroleum, who paid a substantial sum in restitution in 1995.
Love Canal was followed by many other protests in the 1980s and 1990s about the location of hazardous facilities and threats to human health and wellbeing - for example the opposition to the proposed Brooklyn Navy Yard incinerator in New York. By the 1990s, the environmental justice movement was well established in the USA, with strong offshoots elsewhere. In response, the US Environmental Protection Agency established an Office of Environmental Equity in 1992, and in 1996 an Executive Order required every federal agency to consider the effects of its programmes on the health and wellbeing of minority communities. Environmental justice has also been a impmtant focus of the environmental movement in developing countries, often inspired by campaigns agamst corporate projects such as dams, mines, factories and oilfields.

6.1.3 Regulating hazard
International trade creates a wider geographical scale for the distributional logic of industrial hazard and pollution. Just as the logic of capitalism at the urban scale leads to the location of noxious facilities in poor districts, so the same logic at the global scale dictates that the most efficient logical place to locate noxious industrial processes is not in the industrial world's increasingly clean and self-proclaimed 'sustainable' Northern countries but at the feet of the poor in developing countries. There, determination to overcome poverty and lax environmental regulations attract hazardous industries 'like magnets' and create an explosive mixture. As Ulrich Beck put it, 'the devil of hunger is fought with the Beelzebub of multiplying risks'. In the face of globalised corporate power, the nation state is often a weak player, unable to regulate environmental risk.
Developing countries often lack the environmental and anti-pollution safeguards that have become standard in the industrialised world. Walter and Ugelow showed an inverse relationship between level of development and rigour of environmental policies in 145 countries, and this pattern persists.
Lack of pollution controls cuts the cost of production, or rather transfers costs to the host environment and community. In a sense, therefore, pollution is a hidden subsidy for developing-world industry.
Developing countries with a suitable and cheap workforce and undemanding employment law can



achieve a competitive advantage over industrialised countries as destinations for many manufacturing enterprises.
There is certainly evidence that, in the past, lax pollution controls in the developing world attracted corporate investment. US-based multinationals in primary metals industries spent 21 per cent of capital on pollution control in their US operations but less than l 0 per cent abroad. Proportions were similar for other industries; for example, chemicals. Some countries seem to constitute 'pollution havens'. In
198 6, the British company Thor Chemicals began importing waste from the USA and Europe to its reprocessing plant in South Africa. By 1988, mercury levels 1,000 times the WHO standards were discovered in a river SO kilometres away, and by 1992 workers had started to die in the plant, and others had become disabled. The plant closed in 1994, but the pollution remained.
The movement of polluting industrial activity to developing countries has long been directly linked to the rise of pollution control in industrialised countries. In 1966, a Japanese company built a plant making caustic soda on the coast of Thailand. The decision to locate this factory, and its methyl mercury pollution, outside Japan was attractive because Thai environmental protection legislation was weak; in Japan, tight regulations had been passed following acute organic mercury poisoning discovered among the fishing communities in Minamata Bay, Kyushu Island, in the 19SOs. This was the result of pollution from the Chisso Corporation's fertiliser factory, which caused extensive birth defects in children and sickness and mortality in adults. This incident was important in the rise of the environmental movement in Japan, and it raised awareness of the dangers of industrial pollution globally. The Minamata Convention on Mercury, agreed in 2013 and named after the Japanese town, seeks to control all anthropogenic emissions and releases of mercury and mercury compounds and ban its use in manufacture, import and export by
2020.
A particular example of this link between the environmental concerns in developed and developing economies is the burgeoning international trade in waste, particularly toxic and hazardous waste. In the 1990s, World Bank economists made for the economic efficiency oflocating toxic and hazardous waste dumps in poor countries. Today, there is a growing industry in breaking ships and reprocessing shipped electrical waste in developing countries. Mobile phones, computers, fridges and other consumer devices, many of them rendered obsolete by technical advance and the relentless dictates of fashion, are dispatched by the container load to the developing world. As long ago as 2002 the USA was exporting over ten million obsolete computers. Working conditions in these industries are very poor, with workers exposed to hazardous compounds and heavy metals without training, protective clothing or any form of social insurance.
There is also a trade in gathered toxic waste. International trade in hazardous waste is covered by the 1989 Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes, and was addressed in Agenda 21. These agreements reflected shocking cases of hazardous waste dumping in the developing world. In 1988, Guinea-Bissau was offered a contract for $600 million to dispose of l S million tons of toxic waste over five years. That deal did not go though, partly because environmentalists opposing it were able to draw on warnings from a similar dump attempt in nearby Nigeria. In 1988, Greenpeace revealed that two Italian corporations had paid a businessman in the town of Koko in the Niger Delta in Nigeria about $100 per month to store 18,000 drums of hazardous wastes disguised as building materials. Workers clearing the site suffered illness, and the town has been virtually abandoned. Meanwhile, the ship the Karin B toured the ports of Europe in search of a place to unload the toxic waste where it could be properly processed.
The 1991 Bamako Convention subsequently banned waste imports to Africa, and in 1994 the parties to the Basel Convention agreed to ban all export of hazardous waste from countries in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development to non-OECD countries. Yet international transfers of hazardous waste remain standard. Trade in hazardous as well as

on-ha ardous_ waste and _scrap has_ continued to grow rapidly in the current century, driven by
mter ational differentials m the strmgency of environmental policy, efficiency of governance, rates of taxation and transport costs. A substantial part of the trade is illegal, and organised cri1:1e p ays a role m some countries. The trade, and the lack of regulation along the disposal chain, has serious implications for the welfare and health of workers and the state of the environment.
In acce ting industrial investment even though their regulatory capacity and governance are weak, developmg countries are,effec'.ivel tra ing off hopes offut re national economic security against present risk. In t'.1ese exchang'.'s.' sus'.amability within one Jurisdiction is bemg achieved by exporting risk and hazard elsewhere. Yet the movement of polluting industries to the developing world is supported on all sides, by governments, international banks and financial houses, and global corporations. The 'traffic in risk' ma be attractive to both developing-country governments eager for investment and industrialised countryy governn:ients, who are able to pacify envrronmentalists at home by moving hazardous elements in the production process outside their borders. Lack of facilities for identifying or measuring environmental hazards and _costs means they are often underestimated or ignored. Long trans-global production chains tend to restrict transparency about the conditions of production. It can seem profitable to 'manipulate and bribe politicians an bureaucrats rather than worry about technological innovation, efficient resource use or pollution control.
Manufacturers often have a good idea of the dangers implicit in their operations, although they seek to shield this knowledge from their consumers, environmental organisations and sometimes from the state m order not t jeopardise their search for profit. Environmental and social impacts,	' therefore, are m a sense not unexpected but events whose likelihood of occurrence is carefully calculated by corporate planners. Techno-scientific risk is an integral element in the evolution of industrial society.

6.2 GREENING BUSINESS

6.2.1 Environmentalisms versus the corporation
These arguments about corporate responsibility for techno-scientific risk run counter to the ideas discussed i Chapter S about the possibility of environmental modernisation and the green economy to frame a capit ist growt -based route to sustainability. Indeed, the idea of the 'green economy'
gives a special place to business corporations as part of a transition to sustainability.
Not.withstanding arguments about capitalism's 'capture' of environmental concerns through market-based environmentalism, the dominant relationship between environmentalists and corporations since the
197Os has long been antagonistic. Environmental groups developed tactics of direct action to attract media coverag and hig'.1light the damage to the environment caused by corporations. Iconic examples mclude the action by Friends of the Earth UK against the decision in 1971 by the soft drink company Schweppes o use no -returnabl glass bottles, or Greenpeace s occupation of Shells redundant Brent Spar oil platform as it was dragged from the North Sea towards _the Atlantic to be dumped at sea in the 1990s: Greenpeace believed it should be recyded, as lt eventually was. The tactics were crude, confrontational and designed to attract public attention. To many environmentalists, such actions were inspirational.To executives within global corporations, such activities made environmental groups enemies, 'ecoradicals' driven 'more by hostility toward capitalism than concern for nature'.
The critical element of corporate campaigning was to use media coverage of actions to highlight a campaign that called for change. By the 1980s, an increasingly important dimension was to influence consumers, asking them to boyc tt particular products from targeted companies. The logic was that actual and feared reductions m sales would force companies to change production methods.

Thus the Friends of the Earth Rainforest Campaign, launched in 1985, involved a boycott on high-street outlets using tropical timber obtained through clear felling or non-replacement selective logging. As such, campaigns grew in scope and sophistication; environmental campaigners also bought shares in
companies and spoke out at shareholders' meetings about environmental and human rights performance. Such publicity increased pressure on chief executives and board members to avoid arguments and to reassure corporate investors worried about the reputation and the future profitability of the company It might be said, too, that some investors and corporate executives also acknowledged the need to take sustainability seriously, especially as the generation exposed to environmentalism through school and university began to enter positions of authority
The 1990s saw a change in the simplistic tactics of crude opposition of environmental groups to the actions of corporations. Greenpeace, for example, advocated 'solutions-led' campaigning. This required research and development of alternative technologies and then a campaign directed towards making businesses adopt them. One example of such an approach was the development of propane refrigeration technology as an alternative to the use of CFCs or HCFCs in the fight against the ozone hole.
The 1990s also saw the expansion of direct discussions and even collaborations between environmental groups and corporations in a number of sectors, discussed further below. The strategies of environmental groups diversified to embrace the search for influence through discussion and direct meetings, the use of

bold and eye-catching public protests, and legal action. Artists and celebrities were increasingly drawn upon for endorsements. Social media became an increasingly important means of developing and organising support; for example, in the Friends of the Earth project to spell out the words 'climate', 'justice' and 'peace' from linked smartphone locations across Paris during the climate change negotiations in December 2015.The environmental movement continuously expanded and differentiated as new organisations were founded, often finding and motivating substantial new audiences or the mass climate change strikes of school children in 2019.

6.2.2 The 'green' corporation
During the same period, corporate environmentalism, actions taken by firms to make a substantive or symbolic commitment to ecological protection, began to become more common and more important in both boardrooms and in corporate hierarchies. The possibility that corporations could become a source of positive social and environmental impact and could deliver wellbeing and sustainability throughout their supply chains, from the way they source raw materials to the way their products and services are designed, marketed and sold, has been an idea much discussed at business schools, by campaigners, and among some chief executives and corporate boards.
This engagement with the idea that corporations could become 'green' reflected pressure from shareholder calls for environmental and social responsibility often as part of a more general engagement with corporate social responsibility. It represented a rethinking of corporate strategy that emphasised the importance of'brand' values in competition for markets and investment. It also helped position corporations as 'green' or 'caring' to customers. The move was also important internally, as corporate employees began to respond to wider debates about the environment and human rights and wished to feel they worked for a corporation with clean hands and a good heart: the CSR performance of companies was, for example, said to be important in the recruitment of graduates from elite universities. CSR, including human rights and environmental performance, became part of the curriculum of business schools, yet another field within which corporations could seek to separate themselves from rivals, and ambitious executives could advertise their exceptional skill-sets. Such changes reflected the effectiveness of decades of public campaigning by environmental organisations in industrialised countries from the 1960s.
Awareness of the problem of anthropogenic climate change led to the creation of a transnational advocacy network focused on divestment. This movement, drawing in elements from the environmental and the poverty and human rights movements, sought to use the power of capitalism to drive corporate greening. It used a range of campaigning strategies to shame, pressure, facilitate and encourage investors to reduce or sell holdings of fossil fuel stocks in favour of climate-friendly alternatives. The aim was to restrict the amount of capital available to fossil-fuel companies to prevent them moving to high-cost and high-risk
production locations and to make alternative power generation strategies such as wind or solar relatively more attractive, in the hope of increasing production and lowering unit cost.
The conventional argument about corporate environmentalism is that if environmental performance is something that differentiates companies in terms of both consumer choice and investor confidence, normal processes of competition between businesses can become a driver of corporate change towards more sustainable forms of production and operation. It is a basic tenet of ecological modernisation that it pays for business to become cleaner because pollution suggests inefficient processes, and greater efficiency can contribute to profits. One can imagine a benign circle where individual corporations compete to clean up their act in search of leaner production.



Logically, at some point, the earning power of corporations themselves might be compromised by the environmental changes caused by their own production or by wider risks such anthropogenic climate change. What long-term prospects, for example, would lie in leading an oil company in a post-carbon world? Energy supply might offer a sustainable corporate future, but perhaps coal mining or oil extraction from tar sands would not. Of course, such arguments ignore the addiction of modern societies to coal, natural gas, diesel and petrol, and the scale of infrastructural lock-in and subsidy. Feather-bedded by such protection, oil companies remain profitable and their shares remain sought-after, to the chagrin of'divestrnent' programmes and climate change campaigners.
However, corporate 'greening' is not driven to any large degree by the moral agendas of individual corporate leaders. Indeed, it is often severely constrained by calculations of value and profit from board members and financial investors, who choose to maximise short-term gain. Yet some kind of environmental action has increasingly proved necessary even for such conservative interests. One driver for this is government regulation. Such regulation in industrialised countries, backed by environmentalist pressure, has effectively outlawed the once common practice of externalising costs by releasing waste unprocessed into a nearby river or the sea. Likewise, the classic strategy of moving operations to less tightly regulated countries has been less viable as regulations have become tighter everywhere, and consumers have started to worry about how the things they buy are produced, making dirty production untenable, particularly for those companies large enough to have a global reputation to defend.
In such circumstances, self-regulation by a whole industrial sector becomes an attractive strategy. Motives are often defensive: Matten notes that corporations often engage in self-regulation to avoid stricter imposed regulation. The costs of meeting regulations can be high and their timing difficult to predict. Such costs and uncertainties can have effects on corporate performance. An ability to predict these costs can therefore be useful. Under these circumstances, direct engagement by corporations in moves towards environmental regulation can make sense, allowing them to influence the speed of change specified in legislation and steer it in a convenient direction. Indeed, governments sometimes explicitly threaten enforced regulation in the hope that self-regulation will be offered instead. Self-regulation and voluntary 'greening' can help provide a level and affordable playing field for innovation, can make it easier to organise investments in a timely and predictable way, and can also help limit public and government demands for greater environmental accountability and regulation.
Moreover, an innovative corporation can win a competitive advantage over rivals. If a move to a more sustainable form of production is inevitable, then it is in the interest of individual corporations to make that move in a way that gives them a competitive advantage. This advantage might come through the timing of the change, or by influencing the technical requirements. State environmental regulation can favour capital-rich and technologically strong companies within industrialised economies and provide a means to establish de facto trade barriers against corporate competitors, particularly in the developing world.
Environmental performance and sustainability have certainly become an important field for competition with rival enterprises. Responding to opportunities of this kind, leading companies in a succession of sectors took a deliberate step away from rivals in the 1990s and 2000s to try to establish a 'green' brand and to claim emerging environmentally conscious markets. Examples include BP in the oil and gas sector, or the car manufacturer Toyota launching the hybrid Prius in 1997. Such moves, of course, are vulnerable if events suggest environmental claims are bogus, as for example BP discovered after the Gulf of Mexico fire of 2010, which gave the lie to their claims about good environmental performance.

Whatever the motivations, there is no doubt that the environment has become a significant issue for many corporations. For example, in 1995 the managing director of the UK hardware chain B&Q wrote: 'we recognised that our stakeholders, that is our customers, staff, local communities, young people, government and shareholders, believed that the environment did matter'. From the 2000s, corporations began routinely competing on the environmental quality or performance of their products, be it dolphin-friendly tuna, organic yoghurt or 'green' cleaning products. Such claims tend to be selective, indeed often no more than superficial, but they do mark a significant change in corporate rhetoric at least. Such products, and such advertising strategies, have become routine, with those designing them seemingly immune to irony. As global car companies responded in the 201Os to regulations aimed at improving urban air quality and encouraging a shift away from fossil fuels, their advertisements turned on claims of'green' credentials for hybrid or electric vehicles. Thus an advert for a BMW hybrid car was banned in the UK in 2017 because the maker's claim that it was a 'clean' car with zero emissions that helped 'to give back to the environment' was untrue because it had a petrol engine.
The Rio Conference in 1992 was an important landmark in the development of corporate engagement in sustainability issues. Corporations funded a fifth of the costs of the conference secretariat and parts of the programme. In 1990, the Swiss businessman Stephen Schmidheiny founded the World Business Council for Sustainable Development, following an initiative by Maurice Strong, Secretary General of the Rio Conference. In June 1992, their report on environment and development, Changing Course, was published in time to feed into the Rio process. The conference and the WBCSD provided a platform for international business to present its view of environment and development, and indeed to present itself as a central part of the solution.
There was widespread corporate adoption of environmental management systems, as corporations have sought to reassure critics and investors that they have moved beyond minimalist compliance with environmental regulations. The boardrooms of public companies and business schools adopted the language of corporate social responsibility, both as a matter of duty and commercial competitiveness. Issues of human rights and environment have moved towards the centre of corporate concerns, although such commitments can be much easier to draft than to implement, as BP's experiences in the Gulf of Mexico or Shell's experiences in the Niger Delta in Nigeria attested.
Agenda 21 called for partnerships between environmental groups and businesses, and the development of such relationships has been an important element in the post-Rio agenda. There have also been many experiments with partnerships between businesses and NGOs. Such alliances fit the wider context of market environmentalism, claiming to deliver improved environmental
policy while avoiding the unwelcome burden on private enterprise of state bureaucratic regulation.
The idea of a green economy offered unprecedented opportunities for business corporations. The president of the World Business Council for Sustainable Development said in 2012,
a capitalist is somebody who optimizes returns from capital employed. The mistake is that the current economic model is solely focused on optimizing the return on financial capital. We need to add two more elements of capital: natural capital and social capital, and tell capitalists to go and optimize that.


It is the prospect of win-win outcomes, including secure future profit, that motivates moves towards corporate sustainability.




Some chief executives and boards may have been persuaded of the moral imperative to take environmental aspects of their business seriously. Others have seen marketing and growth opportunities in realigning their business to meet the new demands of consumers and the new opportunities in 'green' products. In this formulation, environmental care can simply make good business. In principle, such businesses may promote sustainability, although not all aspects of'green' technologies are benign. Solar panels and 'smart' digital devices depend on rare earth elements and minerals like coltan, creating uruegulated mining booms in countries like the Democratic Republic of Congo.
Phenomena like Internet shopping may seem dematerialised to consumers, but it depends on massive energy consumption by server farms.
Much corporate greening is little more than skin-deep, and many environmentalists reject environmental claims as hype and speak of attempts to 'greenwash' corporate operations using very narrowly selected criteria of environmental improvement. The specific commitments of individual manufacturers or traders have sometimes been shown up by catastrophic performance. The vertical integration of commodity chains has made effective oversight of the environmental and social conditions of production by consumer or regulator effectively impossible. Nonetheless, since 1992, corporations have claimed a significant role in the delivery of global sustainability. The WBCSD has about 200 members from more than 35 countries and 20 major industrial sectors, involving over 1,000 business leaders. It remains a significant global actor, considerably less conservative than some governments in discussing and calling for change in fields such as energy.
In 2007, the United Nations Secretary General launched an initiative called Caring for Climate, to create a cadre of business leaders to lead global corporate responses to climate change. The focus was on the efficiency of energy usage, the carbon burden of products and the search for comprehensive, long-term and effective legislative and fiscal frameworks that might make markets work for the climate by creating a market for carbon. Corporate executives whose organisations had become 'Carbon Pricing Champions' under the Caring for Climate initiative held a side meeting at the 21st Conference of the Parties of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change in Paris in 2015 to advocate for a global price on carbon, and they engaged with government and civil society leaders to promote a critical role for the private sector in confronting climate change.
As discussed in Chapter 5, market environmentalism holds that the world can literally grow out of global environment and development problems and that consumption can be the engine through which sustainable environments and livelihoods are to be achieved. To business advocates of market environmentalism, it is the corporation and the consumer that can deliver on the mainstream agenda of sustainable development. Capitalist markets can clean up and 'green' the planet.Thus Martyn Lewis concludes that, 'regardless of extremist fantasies, we can expect that once capitalist energies begin to be harnessed to environmental protection, a virtuous spiral will begin to develop'. A sustainable environment is to be achieved through self-regulation, through a revolution in corporate thinking that'greens' industry from within, combined with a hard-headed pursuit of the 'green' consumer dollar.
In visions of corporate-led transitions to sustainability, there is still a role for the state. Basically, the state needs to do two things. First, it needs to regulate. The market may be efficient, but it needs management, both to create a level playing field between competitors to prevent a simple 'race to the bottom' and to drive innovation in technology and institutions. Second, the state has to tax to make the market tell the ecological truth, to drive positive change, and to shape consumer behaviour.
Third, the state has to pick up the pieces, paying the costs of unforeseen or residual risks and liabilities that corporations cannot meet because of bankruptcy or voluntary liquidation.
Environmentalists tend to doubt the possibility of distinguishing between genuine changes in corporate activity and simply changes in stories about behaviour. Industries, particularly the extractive industries, have been seen by environmentalists as the drivers of environmental destruction for the last century and a half, since the birth of the modern environmental movement. They still occupy the top spot: as the veteran conservationist Michael Soule notes, 'globalization of intensive economic activity has accelerated the frenzied rush for energy and raw materials and is devouring the last remnants of the wild, largely to serve the expanding, affluent, consumer classes in industrialized and developing nations'. The particular case of the mining industry is discussed later in this chapter, in section 6.4.
The World Economic Forum is a key arena within which new narratives of corporate global citizenship are forged and disseminated. The 48th Annual Meeting, held in January 2018, described itself as 'a true summit of summits'. In the hope of'creating a shared future in a fractured world', its purpose was 'to rededicate leaders from all walks of life to developing a shared narrative to improve the state of the world', in an 'unparalleled global effort in co-design, co-creation and collaboration'. This vision of a corporate-led path to sustainable development continues to win passionate believers.

6.3 GREENING CONSUMPTION
6.3.1 Linking production and consumption
The decisions of corporations about their products constitute one side of sustainable production and consumption. The other is the outcome of the decisions of consumers. The environmental and social impacts of production and consumption, and the supply chains that stretch across the globe, are recognised as an increasingly important factor in sustainability. Environmentalists often express severe doubts about the possibility of a society 'buying its way to sustainability', and there is increasingly sharp debate about the validity and utility of the concept of'sustainable consumption'. Yet consumers are a key target for environmentalists calling for wise choices about purchases. And global brands, particularly in sectors such as fashion, have become sensitive to criticism of their products and the conditions under which they are produced.
Supply chains linking producers and consumers have become important to questions of sustainability for several reasons. First, corporations fear damaging headlines in key markets and the attentions of campaigners and media using the global reach of digital communications; second, supply chains have become the focus of regulators in industrialised countries - for NGOs campaigning on issues ranging from child labour to land management; and third, corporations are concerned to secure supply chains against the risk of disruption from resource shortages or extreme events.
The desire to develop visibility along supply chains and to regulate work practices and environmental impacts at every stage of materials supply and manufacturing has stimulated development of a variety of tools and approaches to enable quality-management systems to take account of sustainability in sourcing, design and transportation. Critical issues include consumption of water, energy and waste across production, shipping and retail, and labour conditions under which products are made and moved.
Approaches include indicators, eco-certification, Life Cycle Assessment, Material Flow Analysis and footprinting.
Life Cycle Assessment, for example, is an approach to the assessment of impacts of a product throughout its life cycle. LCA fits relatively easily into corporate planning if applied early in product design. However, LCA can also be applied retrospectively and far beyond an individual product - that is, across the whole production system of one corporation, through its networks of suppliers and clients, and even at the national scale.



The idea of the 'circular economy' is a model for the continuous flow of technical and biological materials around a 'value circle' from production to consumption and back again via linked waste/raw material flows. The same concept lies behind 'Factor 1O', a circular economy project of the World Business Council for Sustainable Development.
Many corporations have developed initiatives to address supply chain impacts. In the clothing industry, for example, corporations such as Puma, Levi's, Walmart and Patagonia have initiatives to address different parts of the whole chain from production to consumption.
The speed and flexibility of modern supply systems has radically shortened the period between production and consumption for many leading corporations. This does not make supply chain visibility easy to achieve. Fluid and adaptive management of suppliers and minimisation of warehoused stock have made it hard to keep track of where products are sourced, or the conditions under which they are made. Digital technologies have come to play an essential role in tracing products through supply chains, as has acceptance that the challenge is one of creating integrated supply systems rather than discrete chains. Standardisation of products, modular shipping containers, more complete utilisation of

transportation and storage facilities and optimisation of routing all have a role in improving the sustainability of production and supply. Those concerned with such improvements emphasise the importance of attention to the sustainability of each individual element of production and distribution and consumption.
Recognition of the importance to sustainability of the links between production and consumption has thrown attention on the need to analyse material and energy flows. The notion of humanity's 'environmental footprint' has drawn attention to the links between consumption in one jurisdiction and production somewhere else.
International trade has, for example, been shown to be a major cause of biodiversity loss: analysis of 25,000 animal species and 15,000 commodities produced in 187 countries showed that 30 per cent of global species threats were linked to identifiable supply chains between rich consumers and developing country suppliers.
It is widely recognised that globalisation allows unsustainable production practices to simply be moved offshore, but the relationship between domestic and overseas production and consumption is highly complex: diverse, interlinked, multi-staged and, to some extent at least, within the firewalls of private corporations.
The complexity of systems of production and consumption make the analysis of supply chains challenging. Garmendia et al. use the methods of material flow accounting to analyse the material and energy flows of the historically affluent and open economy of the Basque Country. The resulting assessment of the social metabolism of the Basque economy highlights both the dependence of
domestic consumption on key commodity flows and the impacts of that consumption.
Most footprint analyses do not provide spatially explicit data across the production-to-consumption system, and this can lead to misleading generalisations. The impacts of production reflect factors such as soil, climate, economy, infrastructure and agricultural technology, and they may be very localised. Spatially explicit analysis of production data can be achieved by combining detailed production data at sub-national scales with information on domestic
flows of goods and in international trade. This kind of analysis allowed identification of the 1,832 specific municipalities from which different countries sourced the Brazilian soy they consumed in 2011.
A development of this approach called the Trase initiative collates data from the FAO trade data, customs authorities, sub-national taxation authorities, bills oflading, exporters, and storage and processing facilities to link the production of soya in specific landscapes in Latin America to the countries where it is consumed. Its aim is to provide an accessible supply chain information system for over 70 per cent of the total traded volume of the commodities most important to forest loss. The initial focus of Trase is on soya across Latin America, beef in Argentina, Brazil and Paraguay, palm oil in Indonesia and Colombia and coffee in Colombia. There is evidence that public policy interventions on supply chains can be effective. In Brazil, Amazonian deforestation declined by 70 per cent between 2005 and 2013. A major factor was continued pressure to limit forest removal by soya and beef producers.

6.3.2 Certification schemes
Since the end of the twentieth century, a key component of attempts to 'green' production and consumption has been the creation of voluntary 'sustainability standards' for commodity production, widely referred to as certification schemes. A wide range of such schemes exist, addressing both environmental and social dimensions of production.

Three 'fair trade' labels were introduced in Europe in the late 1980s, soon extending to the USA, Canada and Japan. The UK NGO the Fair Trade Foundation was established in 1992 by CAFOD, Christian Aid, Oxfam, Traidcraft, Global Justice Now and the National Federation of Women's Institutes. It is part of a much larger network of organisations globally, in Fairtrade International, which links labelling and certification initiatives across Europe, Japan, North America, Mexico and Australia/New Zealand as well as networks of producer organisations in Africa, Latin America, the Caribbean and Asia. By 2005, the value of Fair Trade products globally was more than S billion Euros. In 2019, the Fair Trade Foundation claimed that 1.66 million farmers and workers were in 1,411 Fairtrade-certified producer organisations worldwide. In 2016, the Fairtrade premium paid was 158m Euros.


Key 'fairtrade' products are coffee, tea and cocoa. These are all long-standing global commodity crops whose trade is dominated by a small number oflarge international companies that are vertically integrated and that sell using internationally recognised brands. The development of'fairtrade' products demands direct competition with these established global-scale corporate producers.
Fair trade and organic production emerged from social movements seeking an alternative to mainstream international commodity markets that have long been highly centralised and controlled by a few large globally integrated businesses. The Fair Trade movement seeks to address global poverty and inequality by offering a reformed system of trade that empowers small-scale Southern producers by providing direct access to ethically minded Northern consumers. The notion of'fair' trade involves issues of fairness in produce pricing and questions of working, employment and living conditions, and environmental sustainability.The Fair Trade Foundation, for example, sets social, economic and environmental standards for companies and farmers. These standards are checked, and the 'fairtrade' mark on raw materials and products provides a guarantee through the supply chain, from field to supermarket shelf.
Many certification schemes have emerged from direct collaborations between commercial producers and their critics. One example is the work of the Round Table on Responsible Soy. This was set up in 2006 by Grupo Maggi, Cordaid, COOP, WWF, Fetrauf-Sul and Unilever. A sustainable soy standard was agreed in 2O1O, and the first producers were certified in 2011 in Argentina, Brazil and Paraguay. Certified soya production has to meet stipulated standards of environmental management, agricultural practices, labour conditions, community relations and legal and business practice - the main standard being to promote 'responsible production, processing and trading of soy on a global level'. It does not include the clearance of forests in the first place to clear land for soy production.
Certification schemes relate not only to fair trade but to the state of nature. In the context of tropical forests, the US-based NGO Rainforest Alliance certified its first coffee in 1990, and the giant US Starbucks coffee chain claims that 99 per cent of their coffee is accredited by US conservation NGO Conservation International under a programme that began in 2004. The rise of Fair Trade and other forms of certification was given a huge boost by the collapse in green coffee prices between 1999 and 2004, which brought devastating hardship to coffee-producing communities. Thus in Central America, amid humanitarian and food security emergencies, collaboration between Nicaraguan smallholder cooperatives and small Californian roasting companies led to alternative models of coffee supply, linking cooperative producers and Bay Area coffee drinkers.This account of certification identifies individual consumers as the key actors in a transformation of consumption reflecting a revolution in ideas about product quality, environment and ethics.
In the marine environment, Unilever and the World Wide Fund for Nature formed the Marine Stewardship Council in 1997. MSC certification focused on the individual 'fisheries', addressing the state of fish stocks, the impacts of fish capture and the rules and procedures in place to ensure sustainability. By 2018, MSC claimed that 14 per cent of the global marine catch came from fisheries that were either certified or engaged in the MSC programme.They were one of a series of global and national schemes to certify the sustainability of commercial fisheries. Their approach involved recognising and rewarding sustainable fisheries, incentivising improvement and cultivating and expanding the market for sustainable seafood through engagement with key commercial partners, and working especially in Europe, the US, China and Japan, and building public awareness and support for sustainable fishing and for their own MSC 'ecolabel' brand.
But the possibility of a consumer-led revolution of this kind is widely questioned and with it the whole notion of'sustainable consumption'. The very success of certification in winning a slice of commercial trade throws up a challenge: if the same tools that drive conventional consumption are used to build up the market share of certified products, can the new way of doing business really be different from capitalism's entrenched system?The centrality of advertising and brand
development to certified product chains has been widely remarked upon. The emergence of speciality and certified coffees implies that different dimensions of consumerism can be combined: economic choice, political action and
identity production.
This process involves what Karl Marx described as the 'fetishism' of commodities under capitalism, meaning their presentation to purchasers in ways that ignore or deny the labour invested in their production. Commodities - like packets of coffee - exist as simple objects, products on a shelf, delivered down a commodity chain that hides the conditions of production. It is precisely this on which certification proposes to shine a light, making the conditions of production legible. Yet the very creation of a certified commodity - the stories told on packets about hard-working farmers, the images of

cloud forests or smiling cooperative members - involves the presentation of a highly stylised picture of a self-reliant peasantry in a sustainable landscape. Wright analysed the representations of'authentic' lives and landscapes in an early newspaper advertising campaign for UK Cafedirect. Striking imagery and related text addressed social relations behind the production, exchange and consumption of coffee, but the story told was so limited and idealised that producers and landscapes were effectively being enrolled as part of the product in just the same way as conventional branding.
The making of any product, even a certified product like coffee or cocoa, involves the creation of such disembodied commodities, a process Marxists call 'fetishisation'.The actual conditions of production - the politics of cooperatives, issues of land rights, the chain of traders, roasters, shippers, wholesalers and retailers - are hidden from view behind packet, trademark and associated images, just as they are for conventional coffee. Paige West reminds us that behind the 'veritable love fest of learning about each other, supporting each other, and contributing to environmental sustainability', speciality coffee is still neoliberal coffee: it has found a place in the market because of changes in the way markets are organised, global in reach, highly individualised and tightly linked to image and brand. Ethical consumers are reached, and effectively created, by advertising as a normal part of commercial market segmentation. Drawing on ethnographic work, West describes the huge distances between the lived reality of coffee production in Papua New Guinea and the images of coffee
producers around whom the new coffees are sold: 'fantasy images of ecologically noble savages and pure guileless ecological primitives' are careful productions and they have material consequences.
The crunch question for certified commodity chains must be what difference they make on the ground. And the answer to this is, inevitably, that it depends. It depends on the nature oflocal institutions - which people are allowed to become members of - cooperatives or other producer organisations, how many people in the community depend on employment as labourers and how they are treated. It depends on the equality ofland distribution and how secure land tenure is. It depends on the continuity and predictability of commodity prices, on the extent to which mark-ups are added through the consumption chain. It depends on the costs of certification and the fairness of the process - certification schemes depend on local agents to carry out inspections, and such arrangements face all the usual issues of competence and corruption.
In the case of environmental certification, a global map synthesising data from over a million farms showed a broad concentration in areas of high biodiversity, with a less good fit for areas most in need of poverty alleviation.Yet the critical issue is effectiveness in terms of the extent to which producers change their land management. In the Western Ghats of India, for example, coffee growers were provided price incentives to adopt Rainforest Alliance certification standards. Yet certification did not change the way land was managed, since coffee was already shade-grown and met the other required standards. Certified growers were disillusioned because of the lack of constraint on their practices. Although labelled as a conservation initiative, growers saw certification as a market tool to serve the needs of coffee traders and exporters.
Of course, it is easy to attack certification for its failings and limitations. The self-righteousness of middle class consumers, piously proposing to right the world's wrongs one flat white at a time, is catnip to radical critics. Like other forms of'ethical consumption' in food, a strong backlash has arisen among both researchers and popular writers.
There is also a tendency for corporations to move away from well-established independent certification schemes. Many large corporate retailers in the UK are abandoning established schemes such as Fair Trade in favour of bespoke arrangements, blending any charitable aims more seamlessly with their corporate brand. This kind of'private eco-branding' allows retailers to govern sustainability dimensions of contractual relationships in the value chain, but it also allows them to capture gains from investments in the development of sustainable supply chains in terms of brand value and customer loyalty.
Certification may not live up to all the expectations laid on it.Yet it certainly creates a space for humane and equitable relations with producer communities and along supply chains. It is better - often substantially better - than rapacious land and community-destroying commercial practices of the past. But that sets a low bar. Collaboration between development and conservation NGOs with businesses to cast light on dark supply chains can achieve small improvements. But it is a marginal tweak to the tuning of capital's engine of production and consumption, not an alternative model.

6.3.3 Regulating timber
One of the earliest attempts at global self-regulation in the face of environmental critique was the tropical timber trade. The complexity and international connectivity of timber markets has long made regulation by individual national governments problematic. Attempts at global coordination of forest management - for example, the Tropical Forestry Action Plan - had limited purchase. One reason is that attempts to regulate international trade in timber and forest products have taken place in the era of neoliberalism and 'free trade'. The World Trade Organization has not been friendly to attempts to regulate trade on environmental grounds. Support for neoliberal strategies has limited the World Bank's capacity to promote sustainable forestry. Organisations like the United Nations Forum on Forests have been described as talking shop without teeth.
A critical challenge for those who seek to establish sustainable forestry through regulation is the problem of illegal logging. This is a major problem in most forest-rich timber-producing countries. In some countries, more than half the timber being traded was estimated to have been harvested illegally, with up to 70 per cent in Indonesia, 80 per cent for the Brazilian Amazon and 90 per cent in Cambodia. Illegally logged timber is used to meet developed world demand for such 'vital' products as hardwood garden furniture. In so doing, the economic values of the standing forest to local people are liquidated and privatised. Because of its illegality, the benefits of such trade are lost to the public purse and recycled abroad or through elite consumption and the black economy.
In 1983, The International Tropical Timber Organization was established between producing and consuming countries to improve tropical forest management, improve the marketing and distribution of tropical timber and to promote wood processing in the producing countries. In 1991, the ITTO set the goal of making the global timber trade sustainable by the year 2000, disseminating guidelines and promoting the case for sustainable management to member governments. However, its progress was slow and achievements very modest. While the word 'sustainable' was attached to many tropical hardwood products, and claimed for many production systems, the majority of tropical forestry continued to degrade forests and cut timber at unsustainable rates. The problem of 'timber mining' continued.
The drive towards the certification of the origin of tropical timber grew out of campaigns against unsustainable logging by environmental NGOs from the 198Os onwards. Media campaigns achieved considerable traction, and attention turned to consumer boycotts of specific companies and products. In the early 1990s, various environmental groups began direct-action protests against the six largest DIY superstore chains in the UK. However, there was no immediately available alternative to the unacceptable and unsustainably produced tropical timber products - no carrot to combine with the stick of consumer protest. An attempt was therefore made in the 1990s to provide this through certification of the origins of products and the conditions under which they were produced. The idea was that, if Northern consumers could distinguish products produced sustainably from those that were not, their purchasing power could drive production towards more sustainable methods.


In 1991, the WWF UK persuaded ten companies producing or using tropical timber to commit themselves to sustainable forest production by 1995, the'1995 Group'. The 1995 Group agreed to move towards phasing out non-accredited wood. They adopted the certification system of the Forest Stewardship Council, established in 1993 as an independent source of certification and labelling of'sustainable' timber. The FSC is a membership organisation, with both industry and environmental interests represented in two chambers. It adopted ten principles of forest management.
The 1995 Group committed themselves to identifying the source of wood and wood products and to appointing a named senior manager to implement this commitment and monitor progress every six months. The companies and the WWF stayed somewhat at arm's length - WWF UK did not verify individual companies' environmental performance, and companies did not gain use of the WWF panda logo. They could use the FSC logo on appropriate products.
These developments took place against the background of an industry backlash against the partnership and certification process, driven by organisations such as the Canadian Pulp and Paper Association. In 1996, the Timber Trade Federation opposed this arrangement as contrary to the principles of free competition and free movement of goods under UK and EU law, and WWF UK was forced to water down the group's membership requirements. This was one dimension of a wider and more systematic neoliberal assault on environmentalism in the 1990s, as industries and right-wing political activists in a number of countries attempted to reverse the