The four principles approach to medical ethics plus
specification is used in this paper. Specification is
defined as a process of reducing the indeterminateness
of general norms to give them increased action guiding
capacity, while retaining the moral commitments in the
original norm. Since questions of method are central to
the symposium, the paper begins with four observations
about method in moral reasoning and case
analysis.Three of the four scenarios are dealt with. It is
concluded in the “standard” Jehovah’s Witness case
that having autonomously chosen the authority of his
religious institution, a Jehovah’s Witness has a
reasonable basis on which to refuse a recommended
blood transfusion. The author’s view of the child of a
Jehovah’s Witness scenario is that it is morally
required—not merely permitted—to overrule this
parental refusal of treatment. It is argued in the selling
kidneys for transplantation scenario that a fair system of
regulating and monitoring would be better than the
present system which the author believes to be a
shameful failure.

Firstly, Raanan Gillon and I share the view that
it is legitimate and rewarding to diagnose
cases through the lens of general ethical
principles. I will here assume, rather than argue
for, moral principles of respect for autonomy; non-maleficence
; benefi-
cence, and justice.1 Methodologically, these principles
function for me much as considered judgments
function for John Rawls in his justly famous
explication of the method of reflective
equilibrium.2 3 Like him, I believe that method in
ethics begins with the moral convictions that
inspire the highest confidence and that appear to
have the lowest level of bias. They serve as first
principles and conditions of more specific moral
conceptions.4 I take these principles to be univer-
sally valid norms that warrant us in making
intercultural and crosscultural judgments about
moral depravity, morally misguided beliefs, sav-
age cruelty, and other moral failures.
Secondly, these abstract principles need to be
specified to make them suitable for the analysis of
a context, case, or policy.5 6 Specification is a process
of reducing the indeterminateness of general
norms to give them increased action guiding
capacity, while retaining the moral commitments
in the original norm.Filling out the commitments
of the norms with which one starts is accom-
plished by narrowing the scope of the norms. This
process involves, as Henry Richardson puts it,
“spelling out where, when, why, how, by what
means, to whom, or by whom the action is to be
done or avoided”. Complex
or problematic cases almost always involve
contingent normative conflict, as do each of the
cases in this symposium. The first line of attack in
managing these cases should be to specify the
relevant norms in order to eradicate the conflicts
among them. This method requires, as does the
associated method of reflective equilibrium, that
we match and adjust all of our well substantiated
moral judgments in order to render them
coherent with the full range of our moral
commitments.7 8
Thirdly, I accept the casuistical postulate that
leading cases often
become enduring and authoritative sources of
reflection and decision making. Past decisions
about moral rights and wrongs in cases serve as a
form of authority for decisions in new cases.
These cases profoundly influence our standards of
fairness, negligence, justified paternalism, and
the like. In this way, analogical reasoning links
past cases to present cases.9–11 Analogical reason-
ing of this sort requires that there be normative
similarities across cases. The casuistical method
therefore assumes that general norms of moral
relevance couple the cases.12 That is, all analogical
reasoning in ethics requires a connecting norm in
order to show that one object or event is like or
unlike another in the relevant respects. The crea-
tion or discovery of these circumstance linking
norms cannot be achieved purely by analogy. At
least rough and ready principles, rules, or maxims
are required. For this reason, casuistry is not a
rival methodological model to the use of princi-
ples and specification, even though they have
been widely regarded in the literature of ethics as
conflicting methods.
Fourthly, styles of case analysis are legitimately
diverse. Different disciplines and different goals
of case analysis will direct a reader to identify
specific elements in the cases as deserving of ana-
lytical development. There is no reason to suppose
that moral philosophy or methods of specification
supply the only way or the best way to treat a case.
From this perspective, there may be no single
right solution to the problems presented in a case,
but it does not follow that morally unjustified and
poorly reasoned answers are beyond valid criti-
cism.
To conclude these comments on method, I am
assuming that very general moral principles are
shared by all moral persons, but that specified
moral frameworks are works in progress that can legitimately vary from person to person and from culture to culture.
These specified moralities include the many moral norms,
aspirations, ideals, attitudes, and sensitivities that spring from
cultural traditions, religious traditions, professional practice,
institutional codes of ethics, and the like. The general moral
standards shared by all moral persons are conspicuously
abstract, universal, and content thin. Particular moralities are
usually the reverse: concrete, non-universal, and content rich.
Frameworks of particular moralities are not finished prod-
ucts. Solutions to moral problems, such as whether and how to
respect religious beliefs and how to develop the most suitable
system for organ procurement and distribution, are projects
periodically in need of adjustment by further specification and
the search for reflective equilibrium. We should assume that,
in the analysis of hard cases, we face a never ending search for
coherence and for solutions to new problems that may
challenge our prevailing moral convictions.
With these observations about method behind us, I turn to
the three scenarios.
THE “STANDARD” JEHOVAH’S WITNESS CASE
The now standard treatment of the “standard” case in the first
scenario is to specify the commitments of the principle of
respect for autonomy for those contexts in which the religious
commitments of a patient conflict with the healing commit-
ments of health care professionals or institutions.13 To look for
an appropriate specification in the case before us, consider two
moral rules that have come into conflict in this first scenario:
1. It is morally prohibited to risk death for a patient whose life
threatening condition can be medically managed by
suitable medical techniques.
2. It is morally prohibited to disrespect a first party refusal of
treatment.
In a wide variety of cases—well beyond those involving
religious commitments—patients refuse promising treat-
ments offered by medical officials. Sometimes these patients
are concerned about the consequences of treatment, but often
their decisions rest on principled convictions or specific objec-
tives that exhibit little or no concern with medical conse-
quences. For example, these patients may not find the
treatment worth the cost, may not trust their doctors, may
wish to die, or may have religious objections to an
intervention.
To handle conflicts between the obligation to treat and the
obligation to respect a refusal, it is now widely accepted that
rule 2 should be specified as follows in order to handle the
problem of a contingent conflict with rule 1:
2.1. It is morally prohibited to disrespect a first party refusal
of treatment by a patient, unless the refusal is non-
autonomous and presents a significant danger to the
patient.
Rule 2.1 qualifies as a specification because much of the con-
tent of the original rule remains intact. Rule 2.1 states that
a physician is not absolutely required to respect refusals of
treatment, but that the range of exceptions is narrow. This rule
has the simple but powerful effect of informing medical offi-
cials that all truly autonomous refusals of
treatment must be respected, no matter the consequences.
There is no evidence in the scenario before us to indicate
that the patient has made other than an autonomous choice,
though nothing in this case indicates whether the choice by
the patient was adequately autonomous. Some moral philoso-
phers have argued that autonomous action is incompatible
with the authority of religious organisations and political
communities that legislate persons’ principles and decisions.
They maintain that autonomous persons must act on their
own reasons and can never submit to the dictates of religious
or political authorities.14–16 No fundamental inconsistency
exists, however, between autonomy and authority if individu-
als exercise their autonomy in accepting the norms of the
authority. Having autonomously chosen the authority of his
religious institution, a Jehovah’s Witness has a reasonable
basis on which to refuse a recommended blood transfusion.
However, rule 2.1 may not be quite as unbending as my
analysis thus far suggests. Occasionally in medical ethics, an
autonomy interest is minimal and a medical benefit maximal,
warranting a paternalistic intervention by the physician. Justi-
fied paternalism of this sort constitutes another type of
exception to rule 2. This exception is limited, however, to cases
in which a vital or substantial autonomy interest is not at
stake. This is not the case in the present scenario. The decision
by this Jehovah’s Witness rests on a paradigmatically vital
autonomy interest. To intervene coercively by compelling a
transfusion could not be justified under any plausible
condition of justified paternalism known to me.
Once the questions I have raised about autonomy are
settled, this case does not otherwise turn on an assessment, by
the patient or others, of harms and benefits to the patient. The
patient’s assessment is not concerned with medical benefits
and harms, and it distorts the logic of the agent’s reasoning to
suggest that there are religious harms and benefits at stake. It
is also unlikely that the patient is taking into account his psy-
chological suffering.
This case also does not turn on principles of justice. Any
rights at stake are rights of autonomy, not rights grounded in
distributive justice. There is potentially a justice connected
question about the legitimacy of using more expensive mate-
rials in place of less expensive and more
efficacious products. But absent further development of this
consideration of justice—a task that well exceeds the
possibilities of the present symposium—this case does not
turn on issues of justice.
THE CHILD OF A JEHOVAH’S WITNESS CASE
In the second scenario, parents committed to the Jehovah’s
Witness faith refuse a blood transfusion for their two year old
child.13 The surgeon and the hospital lawyer resist this decision
and propose to use their own authority to override the author-
ity of the parents. The following two rules conflict in this sec-
ond scenario:
1. It is morally prohibited to risk death for a patient if his or
her life threatening condition can be medically managed by
suitable medical techniques.
2. It is morally prohibited to disrespect a parental refusal of
treatment.
In many circumstances, beyond but including those involving
religious commitments, parents refuse treatment for infants
in the conviction that the infant’s overall best interest is
served. To handle such conflicts, rule 2 can be specified as 2.1:
2.1. It is morally prohibited to disrespect a parental refusal of
treatment, unless the refusal constitutes child abuse, child
neglect, or violates a right of the child.
Rule 2.1 qualifies as a specification because much of the con-
tent of the original rule remains intact, but now we
understand that a medical professional is only generally
required to respect parental refusals of treatment. Rule 2.1 is a
start, but only a start, down the path of specification. It will
not handle all cases and will need further examination of child
abuse, child endangerment, child neglect, and the rights of
children. None the less, 2.1 does show that there is a path out
of the initial conflict between rules 1 and 2, and it indicates
that physicians and hospital administrators are not con-
fronted with an absolute rule requiring that medical officials
uphold parental refusals. With enough additional specifica-
tion, an entire hospital policy could be constructed that is
generally adequate to process the range of cases of parental
refusal that surgeons, paediatricians, and those in other
specialties might expect to see.
Assuming that 2.1 is an acceptable specification, what
action should be performed in the second scenario? My view
is that it is morally required—not merely morally
permitted—to overrule this parental refusal of treatment,
because the refusal does constitute a form of child abuse, child
endangerment, child neglect, or inattention to the rights of
the child. Many forms of neglect, abuse, and endangerment of
children have occurred in the name of religion, and withhold-
ing a recommended medical therapy on the basis of religious
convictions, causing a child’s preventable death, is one of
them.
Jehovah’s Witness parents who refuse lifesaving blood
transfusions for their minor children have been widely
considered in bioethics as a paradigm of overreaching paren-
tal authority. I accept this conclusion myself, but it must also
be acknowledged that this judgment is not free of controversy.
Legislative bodies around the world have, over the course of
the last century, wavered and reversed themselves over these
issues. They have, on the one hand, passed statutes that allow
for so called “religious exemptions” that permit parental reli-
gious convictions to prevail over recommended medical treat-
ment. But when parents then make judgments that endanger
children, many of these legislatures temper or rescind the very
religious exemptions they previously allowed.17
In 1944 the United States Supreme Court decided, in the
case of Prince v Massachusetts,18 that a Jehovah’s Witness parent
could not neglect the education of her nine year old child by
dictating that the child sell religious magazines on the street.
In this case, Ms Prince argued that her religious beliefs were
constitutionally protected, but the Supreme Court found that
rights of religion are not beyond limitation and that a child
cannot reasonably be subjected to a poor education, to
communicable disease, to ill health, or to death. The court
determined that parents may martyr themselves, but may not
martyr their children.
Prince established in US law an important principle that
should be no less pronounced in morals, namely that religious
standards and practices must yield to sober medical judgment
when they seriously affect the welfare and health of children.
Nothing in the protection of religious belief, in law, or in mor-
als, should allow for the neglect of a child’s appropriate medi-
cal treatment. More specifically, if a child faces a risk of death,
disfigurement, serious bodily injury, or ill health a decision to
withhold medical care constitutes parental abuse or neglect
even if the parent’s reason is religious and reflective of the
parents’ considered viewpoint.
We all recognise that rights of parental autonomy often
appropriately prevent governments from intervening in the
rearing of a child. Likewise, we recognise that an overarching
interest of the child must be at stake to warrant government
intervention. But parents who are committed to the view that
medical treatment is sinful or will condemn a child to eternal
damnation are particularly serious dangers to the welfare of
their children. It is difficult, in law and morals, to protect both
parents and children through a provision of religious exemp-
tions from prosecution.
It is unclear why religious conviction stands as a special form
of belief, somehow deserving a more protected status than
moral, political, or aesthetic convictions. No less clear is why
we should allow the religious convictions of a particular
religious group to deserve a protected status. Why should the
views of a denomination, such as Jehovah’s Witness, be more
protected than those same views when embraced by an indi-
vidual who is not associated with this
denomination? A parent could make a judgment about what
he or she accepts as religiously proscribed medical treatment
even if no article of faith held by a religious group such as
Jehovah’s Witnesses stood behind the judgment.
I am pondering how we can distinguish bizarre and unpro-
tected religious convictions from those that are not bizarre and that
merit protection, conventionally the religious mainstream. If
we determine that legitimate parental decisions are confined
to those based on the beliefs of established denominations, then
a parent who is a member of a religious group other than one
that accepts the creed in question could potentially be charged
with involuntary manslaughter or neglect for the same action
and the same religious conviction as that tolerated in support
of a Jehovah’s Witness parent. In short, I am raising sceptical
questions about whether there could be a clear statute or
moral rule that distinguished justifiable from unjustifiable
parental decisions based on religious doctrine.
Parental rights have seldom been regarded in the law of
Western nations as a legal trump. The widely recited language
of parens patriae was not introduced in law to support parental
rights; to the contrary, it was introduced to protect children
against abusive parents. It literally means “parent of the
country” and refers to the sovereign power of guardianship
over those who cannot protect themselves.19 The doctrine sup-
ports state interventions to limit those actions of parents that
breach parental responsibilities to protect a child.
Well before autonomy and privacy were pervasively applied
through law and morals to the decisions of surrogates for
incompetents and minors, the best interests standard—rather
than an autonomy standard—was recognised as having
authority over parental rights. It is the fitting standard for
analysis of the case before us. The best interests standard val-
idly overrides parental rights of control whenever the welfare
interest of the child is substantial. If the interests of the child
were less than substantial—for example, if the outcome of a
surgical intervention had merely the effect of an unobtrusive
scar—then deference to parental wishes would be reasonable.
But the case before us indisputably involves a major interest of
the child.
When parents bring a child to a physician for treatment, the
physician’s primary responsibility is to serve the child’s inter-
ests even if the parents initiated the contract and even if the
physician has obligations of fidelity to the parents. The latter
obligations may be set aside if parental decisions seriously
threaten a child’s health or survival. Jehovah’s Witnesses who
reject blood transfusions for themselves have moral warrant for
what they do only because their own autonomy gives them
authority over themselves; they lose this authority if they
reject medically necessary blood transfusions for their
children. Accordingly, the surgeon in this case has made the
correct choice.
The conclusions I have reached also apply to analogous
contexts of surrogate decision making that involve vulnerable
and incompetent adult patients. A useful rule to restrict all
surrogate decision making is this: If a designated surrogate
makes a decision that threatens the patient’s best interests,
the decision should be overridden unless there is an explicitly
worded document executed by the incapacitated patient that
supports the surrogate’s decision. Such a document requires
that a once competent patient stated a treatment preference in
an advance directive. There is no such document in the case
before us and therefore this exceptive rule does not apply.
I am arguing that there is no relevant difference between
the situation of a vulnerable child whose parents impose their
religious views and the situation of vulnerable adults whose
surrogates impose their religious views. Consider—for exam-
ple, both adult patients who have no religious preferences
and adult patients who have stated religious preferences
that clash with those of a surrogate. I take, as morally basic in
both cases, that health care officials should, in circumstances
of serious medical need, override the preferences of surrogates
who use their religious convictions rather than a best interests
standard. If we accept the validity of overriding surrogate
decisions in these circumstances with adults, then moral
Methods and principles in biomedical ethics
coherence compels us to accept the validity of overriding
parental judgments in relevantly similar circumstances.
SELLING KIDNEYS FOR TRANSPLANTATION
I turn now to the third scenario—selling kidneys.13 Here a dis-
tinction between the justification of policies and the justifica-
tion of acts is needed. Public rules or laws sometimes justifiably
prohibit conduct that is morally justified in individual cases.
To put this distinction to work for present purposes, two moral
questions about selling kidneys need to be distinguished:
Are persons ever morally justified in complying with requests
that they sell one of their kidneys, and Is there an adequate
moral basis to justify the legalisation of a market in kidneys?
As important as legalisation is, questions about the justifiabil-
ity of individual acts present the more fundamental moral
issue.
It is not difficult to construct circumstances of a contract
between consenting adults in which it is morally permissible
to sell one’s kidney. Suppose that my wealthy cousin will per-
ish without a kidney; he offers me $100 000 for mine. I am
well informed about the current and lifetime risks of
nephrectomy, and I could put the $100 000 to good use in
reducing a burdensome mortgage. I understand my cousin
well, and he understands me equally well. Limitation of our
liberty would require a compelling justification for preventing
us from entering into a relationship that will benefit me
financially and will save his life. I see no reason why, judged as
an individual act, it would be morally wrong of me to sell my
kidney to my cousin.
I have thus far assumed that no considerations external to
my relationship to my cousin, such as the implications of a
worldwide market, are pertinent to a judgment of moral per-
missibility. Of course, other considerations may turn out to
constitute good and sufficient moral reasons for banning the
sale of kidneys as a matter of public law. One of the problems
with the literature on a market in organs is that many differ-
ent assumptions are made: some authors assume or argue for
an open market, others a heavily regulated market; some
authors presume a Third World source of the organs, whereas
others do not consider international markets. Some authors
make a distinction between receiving payment for and
purchasing a kidney, whereas others make no such distinc-
tion. Some authors consider only monetary incentives, not payments,
whereas others see no morally relevant differences between
incentives and payments.20–23
I cannot carefully consider the moral relevance of these
important distinctions, but I will argue both that some policies
that allow for sales and incentives are morally problematic and
that, notwithstanding their problematic features, monetary
inducements may still be justified. Although there are serious
moral objections to some markets and incentives, these objec-
tions are not necessarily sufficient, I will argue, to warrant a
ban on these inducements.
In 1999 CNN reported that online shoppers who visited the
internet auction site eBay were surprised to find a “fully func-
tional kidney” for sale by a man giving his home as “Sunrise,
Florida”. He was proposing to sell one of his two kidneys. The
price had been bid up before eBay intervened and terminated
the auction.24 It was not known whether this auction
was genuine or to whom the kidney may have belonged, yet
this auction was largely in public view. A private market in
kidneys would be more difficult to monitor and to control, and
therefore more problematic.
Countries in which markets in kidneys have flourished
support this estimate. One study showed, after locating 305
sellers of kidneys in India, that persons who sold their kidneys
generally worsened rather than bettered their financial
position as a result of the sale, that some men forced their
wives to sell a kidney, and that many sellers suffered a decline
in health status. The selling of a kidney in India has not
worked as a deliverance from indigence. This study shows
that for 96% of those who sell kidneys most of the money
received was spent to pay off debts, to buy food and
clothing, or for marriage; that a person’s pov-
erty was more likely to be worsened than diminished after the
sale of a kidney, and that the money paid was not adequate
to bring sellers out of debt. Of participants, 79% said that they
would now not recommend selling a kidney.25 A second study
in India indicates that sales of kidneys generally do not occur
as a planned passageway from poverty to security, but rather
function as a way of raising money to pay off high interest
loans.26 As is well known in even Western countries, high
interest loans prey on the poor and undereducated who
are caught in a never-ending cycle of borrowing and repaying.
Selling or purchasing a kidney need not involve disrespect
for persons and is not in itself grounds for moral repulsion or
indignation. What, then, is problematic? The worry most con-
sistently expressed in literature on kidney sales is that
markets invariably lead to some form of exploitation. This lit-
erature is, however, less than clear about the nature and con-
ditions of exploitation. I will now consider what I take to be
the two most worrisome problems.
Exploitation deriving from systemic injustice
Firstly, a market in kidneys may be unjust. This is not an issue
of whether volunteers are paid a fair price. The question is
whether free market distribution constitutes a fair system. A
systemic injustice seems to me to occur if the gift of life
through kidney transplantation benefits only the well off, with
the burdens allocated entirely or disproportionately to
disadvantaged members of society. Potentially a market in
kidneys will produce a social situation in which virtually all
kidney “donations” come from the poor, with the rich
enjoying the availability of kidneys and escaping responsibil-
ity for donation. The limited financ-
ing currently available in many national health care systems
would assure that transplantation is available only to the
wealthy. It seems to me unjust to allow and even encourage
donation and selling in a circumstance in which those who
donate or sell are blocked from receiving an organ when they
themselves are in need. Distributive justice calls for more than
libertarian exchange.
Organ donation has always been and should remain a social
enterprise intended both to procure and to allocate a scarce
resource in a broadly inclusive and participatory way. A mar-
ket in kidneys has the potential of drawing a life giving
resource exclusively from a narrow spectrum of willing and
available “donors”. This market is exploitative in the sense
that the disadvantaged are used to the gain of the wealthy in
the absence of a more general system of fair procurement and
fair allocation. Many topics in bioethics beyond organ
donation present similar problems—for example, the selection
and payment of research subjects. Such issues can be
addressed only by specifying and defending the precise condi-
tions under which either an arrangement or a market is
unfair—a task far beyond the scope of this article. This task
would require that we take account of the justice of
background conditions that cause circumstances of disadvan-
tage, no less than constructing a fair system of procurement
and allocation. To my knowledge, no one has as yet supplied a
convincing account of unjust background conditions.
Exploitation deriving from constraining situations
A second problem of exploitation is that potential “volun-
teers” may be constrained by their situation into a non-
voluntary sale—that is, manipulated to the acceptance of
offers because of the constraints of their impoverished condi-
tion. The issue here is not whether those who sell their kidneys
are entirely free of manipulative or constraining influences, but
whether they are sufficiently free so that they are enabled to act
autonomously.
Rather obviously, a consent to the sale of one’s kidney might
not be sufficiently voluntary or informed to constitute an
autonomous consent. Getting a potential volunteer to
comprehend and appreciate risks and benefits can itself be a
formidable task. For example, persons might not adequately
appreciate the risk and nature of a deterioration in health sta-
tus from nephrectomy, what the money they receive will pur-
chase, the risks of a decline in family income, or the risk that
a middle person or hospital will not make full payment.
Potential volunteers may find the benefits overwhelmingly
attractive, causing them to devalue the risks. In one respect,
these volunteers correctly understand basic facts about proce-
dures and arrangements, but, in other respects, their
understanding is inadequate. The fact that 79% of participants
in the study in India afterward said that they would not
recommend selling a kidney suggests that if some persons
who sell their kidneys had more information about likely con-
sequences they would be less willing to sell.
As important as these issues of informed consent are, I will
here set them aside in order to attend to the more salient and
perplexing problem of constraining situations—sometimes
misleadingly called coercive situations. For coercion to occur,
one person must intentionally threaten another in order to gain
compliance. Constraining situations, by contrast, are those in
which non-intentional, coercion like situations cause a person
to feel controlled by the constraints of a situation, rather than
by the design of another person. People unintentionally cause
other persons to feel “threatened,” and sometimes situations
such as illness, powerlessness, and lack of resources present
“threats” of harm that a person feels compelled to prevent at
all costs.
Persons sometimes accept offers that they would refuse
under less constraining circumstances, and the offer of money
for a kidney seems a prime example. Such an offer may be
exploitative in the sense that it manipulates a person into an
unwelcome choice through incentives too attractive to be
refused by the person. The prospect of another shivering night
in the cold, another day without decent food, or another visit
from a debt collector could place enormous pressure on a per-
son to accept an offer of payment for a kidney, just as would an
intentional threat by an employer to fire an employee who
could not find another job unless the employee agreed to be
transferred to an objectionable location and position. The psy-
chological effects on persons constrained to choose payment
for a kidney and to accept relocation in a job may be similar,
and the person can appropriately say in each case: “I have no
choice; it is not feasible to refuse the offer”.
If payments for kidneys were excessively large or even high
enough to attract persons from all classes in society, the pay-
ments likely would be judged overly powerful inducements for
impoverished persons attracted to the payments. Alterna-
tively, if the rate of pay were exceptionally low, kidney
“donors” likely would be recruited entirely from the ranks of
the unemployed and impoverished. The objective of a just
payment scheme would be to strike a balance between
irresistible inducement and underpayment. This goal may be
achievable, but there is no a priori way to set an appropriate
payment level, and discerning management of a market in
kidneys would be demanding.
This issue rests in part on difficulties in determining the
threshold of irresistible offers. An offer that
manipulates one person into acceptance may either fail to be
irresistible to another or be a welcome offer. How an offer is perceived and whether it
will be accepted depend on the subjective responses of the
persons who receive the offer. On the one hand, a subjective
standard for warranted offers would be very difficult to imple-
ment as a policy governing a market in kidneys, because offi-
cials would have to determine how each individual is affected
by an offer. On the other hand, it would be morally perilous to
use an objective standard based on the irresistibility of offers to
the average, or ordinary, or reasonable person. This standard
would fail to protect the most vulnerable of the vulnerable.
Can kidney sales be justified?
How powerful are the two arguments from exploitation that I
have presented? These arguments raise profound questions
about just markets and just offers, but I do not think that they
are strong enough to uphold a ban on kidney sales under all
circumstances. Other moral considerations must be consid-
ered.
Even if those who sell their kidneys are at risk of exploita-
tion in the respects I have identified, it does not follow that a
ban on the sale of kidneys is the best way to address these
problems. Some volunteers will find the offers welcome, and
the consents of many volunteers will be substantially autono-
mous. They may see a kidney sale as their best option, all
things considered. To protect them from an unjust system by
banning the sale of their kidneys could make life worse for
them, and render them more rather than less vulnerable.
There are already many unfairnesses in our systems of
health care that privilege the wealthy and effectively preclude
benefits from flowing to the poor. We do not ban these privi-
leges in the context of a free market economy; rather, we seek
to improve the justice of the system. It is far from clear that
kidney sales should be considered relevantly different, and we
risk coherence in the attempt. A policy of banning sales may
also cause us to neglect the deepest concern of justice that I
have put forward, which is how to render the system of kidney
procurement fair for all parties involved. The current system
is, by all accounts, a shameful failure. A ban on sales could
work as an excuse for neglect of the real injustices in our sys-
tems of procurement and distribution.
We ought not to assume that a fair system of incentives or
payments for kidneys cannot be constructed. Perhaps we can
devise a system of national committees and regulatory agen-
cies that is capable of monitoring each sale or incentive struc-
ture and that appropriately rewards those who respond to an
incentive. At least some governments
may be able to administer a market in which a fair and non-
exploitative price is paid, while avoiding exploitative private
markets and black markets. Even if the prospects are dim at
the present time for a just system of procurement and distri-
bution that includes incentives for kidneys, we should be
working to decrease rather than increase the injustice of our
policies. The current system seems to me to fail this test at vir-
tually every level.